# 4. Implementations of Machine Learning models

***Prerequisite:** Files with selected features named **patient_genes_[variant].csv** must be generated as described in **[Features](../Features)**.*

The notebooks in this folder contain the Machine Learning models based on the following algorithms:

- Logistic Regression
- Support Vector Machines (SVM)
- Random Forest

The models are trained using various patient_genes files located in the /Data folder.
Each model notebook allows easy switching between different feature sets at the top of the notebook.

```python
# Model[Algorithm].ipynb
# To view all available feature set variants, use:
# FeatureVariant.print_info()

# Or refer to the FeatureVariant class in ../DataHelpers.ipynb
GENE_FILE_VARIANT = FeatureVariant.LITERATURE
```

**NOTE**:
The feature variants are mapped to the generated **pateient_genes_[variant].csv** files. As noted previously, ensure that the corresponding patient_genes files have been genarated before training or evaluating the model.

General data helper functions are declared in **DataHelpers.ipynb**.
This includes but is not limited to:

- Splitting the dataset into 80% training data and 20% testing data
- K-fold cross validation
- Exporting of various evaluation metrics

All splits are stratified to account for the imbalance present in the dataset.

The notebooks for the respective models train the type of model they are named after (as listed above) and use the helper functions to perform the actual data splitting, five-fold cross-validation, and preliminary evaluation.

A summarization of the cross-validation results is displayed at the end of the notebook, and all necessary data is exported to the following files, where *[variant]* refers to the model type trained:

- **model_output_[variant].csv**, containing the output for each test case selected from the dataset: the actual TNBC value, the predicted value, and the predicted probability
- **model_metrics_[variant].csv**, containing the accuracy, recall, precision, F1-score, ROC/AUC, and the numbers of True Positives, True Negatives, False Positives and False Negatives, for both the initial test data (first row) and the five folds used in cross-validation.

***Next step***: Additional evaluations and visualization based on the generated data, including combining those for different models, is generated by the notebook in the **[Evaluation](../Evaluation)** folder, that lives next to this Model folder.

## Key findings

When using literature-based features based on the key findings of the previous step, the three models trained (logistic regression, random forest and SVM) perform very similarly. Overall, performance is moderate or at best slightly better than moderate, which is likely caused by the limited size and relative imbalance of the dataset, with only a small number of positive TNBC samples.

Interestingly, perfect recall is seen on the initial split. However, this disappears in cross-validation as well as when changing the initial random state. This seems to be an artifact of the random state and limited positive sample size, rather than model quality or training issues.

While the models perform similarly, logistic regression shows slightly weaker performance compared to the others, particularly in precision and F1.

### After applying SMOTE

**SMOTE**
Method to address class imbalance.
In our case the majority class were cases that did not have TNBC, while the cases with TNBC were the minority class. The minority class significantly had fewer examples. Instead of simply duplicating examples of the minority class, SMOTE creates generates synthetic data, as the former can lead to overfitting.

For the most part, it seems that all models show equal or better accuracy and higher mean CV accuracy when SMOTE is applied except for Logistic Regression's Literature feature set.

Comparing the models performance, we can see that SVM and Random Forest consistently outperforms Logistic Regression, especially after SMOTE.
As Logistic Regression lags behind slightly, this may suggest that the relationship between features and labels is non-linear to a certain extend which SVM and Random Forest handle better.

Because scores have improved overall after applying SMOTE, this supports the idea that class imbalance was a limiting factor, and SMOTE does help the models learn more generalizable patterns, especially in Random Forest and SVM.

#### Breakdown by model

##### Logistic Regression

| Feature Set | SMOTE | Accuracy        | MEAN CV Accuracy  |
|-------------|-------|-----------------|-------------------|
| Literature  | NO    | 0.95            | 0.9447            |
| Literature  | YES   | 0.94:arrow_down:| 0.9443:arrow_down:|
| Research    | NO    | 0.95            | 0.9386            |
| Research    | YES   | 0.96:arrow_up:  | 0.9420:arrow_up:  |

**Findings**:

- SMOTE does not help with Literature feature set.
- On the other hand, SMOTE does help with Research feature set.
- Overall, at worst SMOTE provide a drop in scores for the Literate feature set and at best modest benefit on the Research feature set.

##### SVM

| Feature Set | SMOTE | Accuracy         | MEAN CV Accuracy |
|-------------|-------|------------------|------------------|
| Literature  | NO    | 0.94             | 0.9488           |
| Literature  | YES   | 0.95 :arrow_up:  | 0.9519 :arrow_up:|
| Research    | NO    | 0.94             | 0.9427           |
| Research    | YES   | 0.97 :arrow_up:  | 0.9664 :arrow_up:|

**Findings**:

- As indicated here below in Random Forest as well, both models are leveraging the improved class balance well.
- This can be seen in a great boost in accuracy and MEAN CV accuracy scores with SMOTE, especially on Research feature set.

##### Random Forest

| Feature Set | SMOTE | Accuracy       | MEAN CV Accuracy |
|-------------|-------|----------------|------------------|
| Literature  | NO    | 0.93           | 0.9355           |
| Literature  | YES   | 0.96 :arrow_up:| 0.9681 :arrow_up:|
| Research    | NO    | 0.95           | 0.9325           |
| Research    | YES   | 0.97 :arrow_up:| 0.9727 :arrow_up:|

**Findings**:

- Clear indication that SMOTE helps Random Forest across both feature sets.
- Research feature set with SMOTE yield the best cross-validation score compared with other models (0.9727).
- Suggests that Random Forest is robust and can take advantage of SMOTE-generated synthetic data very well.

### Training on different feature sets

| Model              | BORUTA| EXTRA TREE    | AUTOMATED        | RESEARCH ANOVA   |
|--------------------|-------|---------------|------------------|------------------|
| Logistic Regression| 0.9582| 0.9588        | 0.9780           | 0.9524           |
| SVM                | 0.9727| 0.9675        | 0.9832           | 0.9664           |
| Random Forest      | 0.9733| 0.9727        | 0.9797           | 0.9704           |

## Suggestions for improvement ***[TODO IF TIME PERMITS]***

- ~~Apply SMOTE to remove the imbalance **(moet hier want SMOTE moet alleen op de testdata, dus na de split!)**~~
- Train more (different types of) models, e.g. XGBoost
